# PIP-144: Making SchemaRegistry implementation configurable

Pulsar comes with an inbuilt schema registry and a pluggable schema storage. Schema storage's default implementation is bookkeeper-based but a new implementation can be provided by the user. Schema registry on the other hand interacts with the configured schema storage and offers ability to do schema CRUD as well as performs compatibility checks.

Since schema registry is not pluggable, it is not possible as of today to enhance/extend what pulsar offers out of the box. This is usually true in organizations where an existing schema registry is already present and used in other systems that producers and consumers interact with. Having a pluggable storage is not sufficient, some of the reasons are:

- The user may want to cache (schema-version,schema-data) in-memory rather than doing a fetch from schema storage for scaling purposes.
- The user has a compatibility evaluation logic of their own. For example, the user wants to implement semver-based versioning of schemas with minor versions being forwards-compatible and major versions indicating breaking changes.
- Additional policies need to be applied to compatibility or schema fetch patterns depending on business requirements and the schema in question.

For above reasons, we are proposing support for a pluggable schema registry in pulsar.

## Goal

The scope of this is to make schema registry service pluggable in order to support different forms of versioning and compatibility checks, depending on the use case.

All of the changes are on the broker-side and backwards compatible. Existing schema registry service implementation will continue to remain the default one. Users will be able to provide a different registry by specifying the class name in the broker config and loading the relevant jar on the broker's class path. The experience for pluggable schema registry is going to be the same as the one for pluggable schema storage.

User-facing addition of flag in broker.conf

```
# Override the schema registry used by pulsar with a custom implementation. If this config is not provided,
# the default schema registry (SchemaRegistryServiceImpl) will be used.
schemaRegistryClassName=
```

Example of how a custom schema registry can be implemented by the user where they only want to change a certain set of behaviors and reuse the rest.

```java
public class MySchemaRegistry extends SchemaRegistryServiceImpl {
    
    @Override
    public void initialize(ServiceConfiguration configuration, SchemaStorage schemaStorage) throws PulsarServerException {
        super.initialize(configuration, schemaStorage);
        //read config and do some other op
    }
    
    @Override
    public CompletableFuture<List<CompletableFuture<SchemaAndMetadata>>> getAllSchemas(String schemaId) {
        CompletableFuture<List<CompletableFuture<SchemaAndMetadata>>> schemas = super.getAllSchemas(schemaId);
        //apply some filtering logic and return
    }
    
    @Override
    public CompletableFuture<Boolean> isCompatible(String schemaId, SchemaData schema, SchemaCompatibilityStrategy strategy) {
        //custom operation
    }
}
```


## API Changes

Add a configuration parameter to set the schema registry to be used. This is illustrated in the "Goals" section above.
Add an `initialize(...)` method to `SchemaRegistryService` interface, similar in lines to the `AuthorizationProvider` interface already existing in Pulsar. This will ensure initialization of the plugged in schema registry with the required dependencies.

`void initialize(ServiceConfiguration configuration, SchemaStorage schemaStorage) throws PulsarServerException;`


## Implementation

These are the changes covered in the PR:
- Make the schema registry configurable via broker config. The changes are:
  - Add a new config called `schemaRegistryClassName` in `ServiceConfiguration` with a default value of `org.apache.pulsar.broker.service.schema.SchemaRegistryServiceImpl`
- Use `initialize(...)` method instead of constructor to set dependencies like schema storage and compatibility checkers. This is being done to ensure that the contract becomes explicit to the implementer of the interface rather than having an assumption in the codebase around what the constructor params should be. The changes are:
  - Add an `initialize(...)` method in `SchemaRegistryService` without an implementation
  - Update `create(...)` method in `SchemaRegistryService` to create the instance of schema registry based on the `ServiceConfiguration` and `initialize(...)` method, instead of using a particular constructor overload.
- Renaming a few methods in the `SchemaRegistryService` interface to reflect their behavior. The changes are:
  - Rename `deleteSchema` to `putEmptySchema` in `SchemaRegistryService`
  - Rename `deleteSchemaStorage` to `deleteSchemaFromStorage` in `SchemaRegistryService`
- Remove `checkCompatible` from `SchemaRegistryService` and make it a private method in `SchemaRegistryServiceImpl` because it is not used anywhere else
- Make `compatibilityChecks`, `schemaStorage` and `clock` non-final in the default implementation as they are now being set in `initialize(...)` method
- Move `getCheckers(...)` from `SchemaRegistryService` to `SchemaRegistryServiceImpl` since this behavior is tied to how default schema registry implementation works.
- Move the null check on schemaStorage from `SchemaRegistryService` to `PulsarService`. The null check will now be used to decide the name of the schema registry which needs to be instantiated.

This change has been done and a PR has been raised here: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/14102 


## Reject Alternatives

- We had a requirement to override/change the way compatibility logic is performed in the default schema registry. To that end, it was considered separating out schema validation/compatibility logic into a different interface and impl, similar to how schema storage is modeled as of today. The user will be able to use the default schema registry but influence the behavior of compatibility checks by providing their own implementation.
We did not end up taking this route because in most of the cases, the default compatibility checks should make sense as-is. And in scenarios where they require change, users can always plug in a new schema registry and use the default schema registry for behavior they want to retain using composition. This is demonstrated in the example given in the "Goals" section.
- We had a requirement to influence the list of schemas returned by the schema registry. To that end, we considered changing the `SchemaStorage` implementation itself (which is already pluggable and user-facing as of today). But the filtering needed to be done on the properties in `SchemaData`/`SchemaInfo`, and doing the deserialization in the schema storage layer did not match its purpose.

## Authors
Aparajita Singh (https://github.com/aparajita89)
Ankur Jain (https://github.com/anvinjain)
