# PIP-433: Optimize the conflicts of the replication and automatic creation mechanisms, including the automatic creation of topics and schemas

# Background knowledge

#### Topic auto-creation by Rest API if you have enabled Geo Replication.

The source broker will copy the REST requests that is a partitioned topic creation to the remote cluster if you have already enabled a namespace-level Geo Replication.

The source broker will do the following things when you try to enable a topic-level Geo-Replication, and you did not enable a namespace-level Geo-Replication.
- The source broker checks whether the partitioned topic exists under the remote cluster
- If yes, the source broker compares both partition counts, enabling the topic-level replication if both clusters have the same number of partitions; otherwise, you will get a bad request error.
- If not, it will create the partitioned topic with the same partitions count automatically under the remote cluster.

#### Topic auto-creation by clients if you have enabled Geo Replication.
- `Client of source cluster`: start a consumer/producer for a topic
- `Client of source cluster`: Get partitions for topic
    - At this step, the client will try to get the partitioned metadata of the topic. If the topic does not exist, the broker will create the partitioned metadata automatically.
- `Client of source cluster`: Start internal consumers/producers for each partition
    - At this step, the client will try to connect to the partition. If the partition does not exist, the broker will create the partitioned metadata automatically.
- `Source broker`: starts the geo replicator when a partition is loading up. 
  - The geo replicator maintains an internal producer for the topic under the remote cluster.
  - The internal producer is a single partition producer; it will not trigger a partitioned metadata auto-creation.
  - When starting the internal producer, it confirms that the target topic under the remote cluster should be a non-partitioned topic or a partition.
  - **(Highlight)** Otherwise, prints error logs and stops.

#### Schemas replication if you have enabled Geo Replication.
The internal producer of the geo replicator starts with an `auto-produce` schema, copies a new schema it reads from the source cluster to the remote cluster, and it will be stuck once a schema is incompatible to the remote cluster.

# Motivation

#### Issue 1: conflict topic creation if enabled Geo-Replication
**Steps to reproduce the issue**
- Configurations of both the source cluster and the remote cluster 
  - `allowAutoTopicCreation`: `true`
  - `allowAutoTopicCreationType`: `non-partitioned`
  - `defaultNumPartitions`: `2`
- The namespace `public/default` exists, but you have not enabled Geo-Replication for the namespace yet.
- Start a producer for a topic `persistent://public/default/topic` on the source cluster.
  - It triggers a partitioned topic with `2` partitions created.
- Enable namespace-level Geo-Replication for the namespace `public/default`.
- Start geo replicator for the existing partition `public/default/topic-partition-0`
  - Without [PIP-414: Enforce topic consistency check](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/24213), the geo replicator will trigger a non-partitioned topic creation, which is named `public/default/topic-partition-0`
  - With [PIP-414: Enforce topic consistency check](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/24213), the geo replicator get a denied error.
- However, the user wants to allow the replicator to copy messages to the remote cluster.

#### Issue 2: Replication is stuck because the remote side does not allow schema updates
**Steps to reproduce the issue**
- The topic`public/default/topic` has enabled a geo replication.
- Users controls the topic schema manually, do not allow auto update schema by consumers/producers for both clusters.
- The internal producer is stuck after the user sets a new schema on the source cluster.
- However, the user wants to allow the  replicator to copy the schema to the remote cluster.

# Goals
1. Add an optional choice: always allow the replicator to register schemas if compatible, even if users set `set-is-allow-auto-update-schema` to false.
2. Regarding auto-creation that is triggered by replication, rather than the original solution that triggers auto-creation when the internal producer of the replicator, we add the admin api client into the replicator to call the admin api to create topics.
3. Checks compatibility between two clusters when enabling namespace-level replication, which includes the following
  - All topics’ partitions that have been created should be the same, including `__change_events`
  - Auto-creation policies between both clusters should be the same, including broker-level and namespace-level.

# Detailed Design

### Implementation overview

**Regarding goal 2: uses admin API client to trigger topic creation on the remote side**
- Replicators will involve an admin api client, which previously only involved a Pulsar client.
  - Do not trigger a topic auto-creation if the value of the configuration `createTopicToRemoteClusterForReplication` is `false`, which keeps the previous behavior. See more details  [PIP-370: configurable remote topic creation in geo-replication ](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/23124).
  - Create a topic if it does not exist on the remote side, ignoring the auto-creation policies that were defined at the broker-level and namespace-level.
    - Difference with the previous behavior: the previous used producer creation events to trigger a topic auto-creation.
  - Print error logs if the partitions between the source and the remote cluster are different, which keeps the previous behavior.
- Removes the mechanism that copies Rest API commands that create a partitioned topic to the remote cluster, including the following mechanisms, but will not remove the check logic.
  - Broker replicates the topic creation Rest API request if the namespace-level replication is enabled.
  - Broker triggers a topic creation request to the remote cluster when enabling a topic-level Geo Replication
 
We skip adding the overview of the implementation, since goals 1 and 3 are simple and clear enough.

### Public API

#### Regarding Goal 1: "always allow the replicator to register schemas if compatible"

**The original design of `pulsar-admin namespaces set-schema-autoupdate-strategy`**

```
pulsar-admin namespaces set-schema-autoupdate-strategy
  -c, --compatibility=<strategyParam>
                        Compatibility level required for new schemas created
                          via a Producer. Possible values (Full, Backward,
                          Forward).
  -d, --disabled        Disable automatic schema updates
```

To add a new param `--enable-for-replicator`, which means that always allow the replicator to register a new schema if compatible. The default value is `true`.


#### Regarding the goal-2: "uses admin API client to trigger topic creation on the remote side"


**`pulsar-admin topics create-partitioned-topic <topic name>`**
- Previous behavior:
  - It copies the creation request to the remote cluster if the topic does not exist on the remote cluster
  - It creates a partitioned topic on the local cluster
- The behaviors with the proposal
  - It creates a partitioned topic on the local cluster.
 
**`pulsar-admin topics set-replication-clusters -c <clusters> <topic name>`**
- Previous behavior:
  - It confirms that both partitioned topics between the both cluster have the same partitions.
  - It copies the creation request to the remote cluster if the topic does not exist on the remote cluster
  - It creates a partitioned topic on the local cluster
- The behaviors with the proposal
  - It creates a partitioned topic on the local cluster.

```shell
pulsar-admin namespaces set-auto-topic-creation 
  -d, --disable         Disable allowAutoTopicCreation on namespace
  -e, --enable          Enable allowAutoTopicCreation on namespace
  -n, --num-partitions=<defaultNumPartitions>
                        The default number of partitions of a topic to be
                          auto-created, applicable to partitioned topics only
  -t, --type=<type>     Type of topic to be auto-created. Possible values:
                          (partitioned, non-partitioned). Default value:
                          non-partitioned
                          Default: non-partitioned
```

To add a new param `--always-allow-for-replicator`, which means that always allow the replicator to trigger a topic auto-creation, including partitioned topics. The default value is `true`.

#### Regarding the goal-3: "checks compatibility between two clusters when enabling namespace-level replication"

Add a new parameter for the exits pulsar-admin command `pulsar-admin namespaces get-auto-topic-creation`

```shell
--applied get applied auto topic creation, returns a broker-level configuration if the namespace-level policy is empty.
```

Add additional checks when calling `pulsar-admin namespaces set-clusters`, which brokers will do
- Auto-creation policies must be the same, including broker-level and namespace-level.
- All exists topics that has the same name between both cluster should have the same partitions, including `__change_events`.

Add a new param for the exists pulsar-admin command `pulsar-admin namespaces set-clusters`

```shell
--adjust-namespace-level-policies-automatically broker uses the policies that applied on the source cluster as a standard
                                                value, to adjust remote cluster policies, including auto-creation
                                                policies, topic partitions of existing topics, and schema update policies.
```

Add a new parameter for the exists pulsar-admin command `pulsar-admin namespaces set-clusters` to preview what will be modified for the new feature `--adjust-namespace-level-policies-automatically`

```shell
--preview preview the changes that will be applied when enabling "--adjust-namespace-level-policies-automatically"
```

### Configuration

#### Regarding the goal-1 and goal-2
- The configuration `broker.conf -> allowAutoTopicCreation` will never affect the behavior of the replicator anymore.
- The configuration `broker.conf -> isAllowAutoUpdateSchemaEnabled` will never affect the behavior of the replicator anymore.

### Metrics

Nothing.

# Monitoring
Nothing.

# Security Considerations
Nothing.

# Backward & Forward Compatibility

Nothing is needed to be done.

## Pulsar Geo-Replication Upgrade & Downgrade/Rollback Considerations
Nothing.

# Alternatives
Nothing.

# Links

<!--
Updated afterwards
-->
* Mailing List discussion thread: https://lists.apache.org/thread/p16gwhfx6rkxdp8dm9pckn43o5875o1s
* Mailing List voting thread: https://lists.apache.org/thread/3nwsbqlkgorswr1oynjwmcz6blkkl5vm
