# Background knowledge

The Cursor is used to read data from ledgers, there are three scenarios for reading messages(we can call these scenarios Read-Scenario):
- **Sequential Read**: Read entries from `read position`(include), after the read is complete, set `read position` to the next position of the last entry of this read, then the next round of **Sequential Read**. Note: In addition to delivering messages to consumers, some internal apis are also using **Sequential Read**, such as `Compaction`, `TopicTransactionBufferRecover`, `Replicator` and so on.
- **Message Replay Read**: Normally consumers will acknowledge messages all they received, but sometimes the consumer can not handle messages and asks the broker to redeliver these messages(these messages are always earlier than `read position`). E.g. call `consumer.negativeAcknowledge`; close a consumer and there are some messages held by this consumer, these messages will be redelivered to other consumers. Message Dispatcher will cache the position of messages which should be redelivered, and Cursor will read messages which were cached in the memory of Message Dispatcher in the next round(we call this cache **Replay Queue**). In general, **Message Replay Read** does not modify the `read position`, except in the scenario **A compensation mechanism of Message Replay Read** below.
- **Direct read**(Read directly using Managed Ledger): there are some APIs that can read messages at a specified position, but generally do not affect the attributes of the Cursor or Message Dispatcher. E.g.
  - [`pulsar-admin topics examine-messages`](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.0.x/admin-api-topics/#examine-messages)
  - [`pulsar-admin topics get-message-by-id`](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.0.x/admin-api-topics/#get-message-by-id)

Summary: The `read position` of the Cursor is a marker, reads above or equal to this marker are called **Sequential Read**, and reads below this marker are called **Message Replay Read**(these messages have been read once by **Sequential Read** before), and **Direct read** does not care about this marker(in fact, **Direct read** does not even care about Cursor).

The Cursor also maintains the info of messages acknowledged(to avoid reading repeated). It uses two attributes to record which messages were acknowledged:
- `individual Acknowledged messages`(uncontinues acknowledgment).
- `mark deleted position`: The messages before this position were all acknowledged. The Cursor updates it when the first message is acknowledged.

**Cursor Position Reset**: **Cursor Position Reset**: As described above, the `read position` and `mark deleted position` is very important to Cursor. `read position` is the watermark of reading, **Sequential Read** expects the `read position` always be changed by itself; `mark deleted position` is the watermark of acknowledgment, acknowledgment expects the `mark deleted position` always to changed by itself. There have some cases that will also change the `read position` and `mark deleted position`, causing the incorrect reading and incorrect changes of `mark deleted position`. For example:
- Reset the `mark deleted position` and `read position` to re-consume messages from a certain position(it also can use to skip the messages before a certain position)
  - [Admin API: pulsar-admin topics reset-cursor](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.0.x/admin-api-topics/#reset-cursor)
  - [Client API: consumer.seek](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-client-api/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/client/api/Consumer.java#L482)
- Skip some messages(Manual moves the `mark deleted position` to a higher position, and possible to change `read position`): 
  - [Admin API: pulsar-admin topics skip](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.0.x/admin-api-topics/#skip-messages): Skip a certain number of messages.
  - [Admin API: pulsar-admin topics clear-backlog](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.0.x/admin-api-topics/#skip-all-messages): Skip all messages.
- The internal components of Pulsar sometimes reset the `read position` to re-consume all unacknowledged messages(such as `Compactor`, `Replicator` and `Dispatcher`).
  - [Internal API: cursor.rewind](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/managed-ledger/src/main/java/org/apache/bookkeeper/mledger/impl/ManagedCursorImpl.java#L2477)<sup>[1]</sup>
- Since read compacted is a special mode of consumption, instead of "set `read position` to the next position of the last entry of this read," it calls [cursor.seek](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/managed-ledger/src/main/java/org/apache/bookkeeper/mledger/impl/ManagedCursorImpl.java#L2493) to set `read position` to the next position that was not filtered out.
  - [Internal API: cursor.seek](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/managed-ledger/src/main/java/org/apache/bookkeeper/mledger/impl/ManagedCursorImpl.java#L2493)
- There is a [compensation mechanism](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/6403) of **Message Replay Read**: for some unknown reason, the rule "reads below Read Position(not include) is called **Message Replay Read**" be broken, causing the message which equals `read position` was put into the **Replay Queue**, which leads to repeated consumption(read by Message Replay Read once and read by Sequential Read once). The [compensation mechanism](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/6403) moves the `read position` of the Cursor to the next position to avoid repeated consumption(It did not fix the root cause, just did a backstop).

# Motivation

When other components work with Cursor, issues often arise because **Message Reading** and **Cursor Position Reset** are executed at the same time.

---

**Case-1:** In the scenario of delivery messages, if **Message Replay Read** and **Cursor Position Reset** are executed concurrently, the consumption will be out of order. For example:
| time | **Cursor Position Reset** | **Message Replay Read** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | | Start to read `[3:5, 3:6]` |
| 2 | | Waiting for the response of BK |
| 3 | Clear redelivery messages |
| 4 | Set read position to `3:0` |
| 5 | | Read complete, and send `[3:5, 3:6]` to the client |

In this scenario(referred to as **Scenario-1**), the consumer will receive `[3:5, 3:6]` first and then receive `[3:0.....]`

---

**Case-2:** In the scenario of delivery messages, if **Sequential Read** and **Cursor Position Reset** are executed concurrently, the consumption will be out of order,  also leading to consumption being stuck. For example:
| time | **Cursor Position Reset** | **Sequential Read** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | | Start to read `{readPosition=3:5, entriesNum=5}` |
| 2 | | Waiting for the response of BK |
| 3 | Clear redelivery messages |
| 4 | Set read position to `3:0` |
| 5 | | Read complete, set the read position to `3:7`, and send `[3:5 ~ 3:9]` to the client |

In this scenario(referred to as **Scenario-2**), the consumer will receive `[3:5 ~ 3:9]` first, and the messages `[3:0~3:4]` will not be delivered to the client until unloading the topic.

---

**Case-3:** In the scenario of delivery messages, if **Cursor Position Reset** is executed, the attributes(including `read position`) of the Cursor will be changed(`action 1`)<sup>[2]</sup>, and the attributes of the Dispatcher(`action 2`) will be changed too<sup>[3]</sup>. If these two actions are not executed atomicity, this will cause the attributes of Cursor to to be inconsistent with the attributes of Disptacher, and cause some problems. For example:
| time | **Reset cursor** | **Consumer reconnect** |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | disconnect all consumers |
| 2 | | remove consumer |
| 3 | | add consumer_1 |
| 4 | | rewind cursor to `3:0` |
| 5 | | add consumer_2 |
| 6 | | add consumer_2 to recently joined consumers, `max read position` is `3:0`<sup>[4]</sup> |
| 7 | set read position to `1:0` |

In this scenario(referred to as **Scenario-3**), the `consumer_2` will be stuck by the mechanism Recently Joined Consumers of Key_Shared mode<sup>[4]</sup>. It's a simple question, but it's more complicated than that:
- If there has an in-flight reading.
- If there is more than one **Cursor Position Reset** action running.
- Both above.

Note: In the Multi Consumer Dispatcher, there has a mechanism that tries to fix the issue caused by the action `cursor.rewind` and **Sequential Read** executed concurrently(referred to as Rewind After In-flight Reading). It works like this: if there has an in-flight reading when calling `cursor.rewind`, just do rewind after the in-flight reading is finished.` but this mechanism has the following drawbacks:
- Makes a new issue lead to a new issue<sup>[5]</sup>.
- Only applicable to `cursor.rewind`.
- Only applicable to Multi Consumer Dispatcher.
- If there is more than one in-flight reading(one Sequential Read and some Message Replay Read might exist simultaneously), this mechanism can not work.

---

**Case-4:** In the scenario Geo-Replication<sup>[7]</sup>

| time | `thread rewind` | `thread reading messages`|
| -- | --- | --- |
| 1 | receive messages `[3:0 ~ 4:0]` |  |
| 1 |  | async read start(`readPosition=4:0, markDeleted=3:0`) |
| 2 | rewind `readPosition` (` --> 3:0`)` | |
| 3 |  | read complete, set `readPosition`(` --> 5:0`) |
| 4 | receive messages `[4:0 ~ 5.0]` |  |
| 5 | the messages `3:0 ~ 4:0` will nolanger be received until next `rewind` |

---

**Case-5:** In the scenario Geo-Replication<sup>[7]</sup>

| time | `receive messages` | `async load schema` |
| --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | receive messages `1~3` | 
| 2 | async load schema if needed<sup>[1]</sup> |
| 3 | receive messages `4~5`|
| 4 | send messages `4~5` to remote cluster | 
| 5 | | load schema success, rewind cursor to position `1`  |
| 6 | <strong>(Highlight)</strong>Receive messages `1~3` and will send fail by duplication check |

<strong>[1]</strong>: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-broker/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/broker/service/persistent/GeoPersistentReplicator.java#L160-L179

You can reproduce this issue by the test [Replicator.testDiscontinuousMessages](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/20128/files#diff-3e7faf752b3a81de78c035760812c587b1b91e8ad9066e1fd4d2a9bbed59e589R1768)

---

**Case-6:** In the scenario Geo-Replication<sup>[7]</sup>
- receive messages `1~3` 
- process these messages to send to the remote cluster, but an exception occurs<sup>[2]</sup>.
- receive messages `4~5`
- send messages `4~5` to the remote cluster
- the messages `1~3` are lost

<strong>[2]</strong>: https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-broker/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/broker/service/persistent/GeoPersistentReplicator.java#L190-L192

---

**Case-7:** Incorrect recent joined position of consumers in Key_Shared mode.

<strong>Background-1</strong>: After all consumers are removed, the Dispatcher will call `cursor.rewind` and reset all attributes in memory, making the Dispatcher like a new Dispatcher.

<strong>Background-2</strong>: there have a variable `recentlyJoinedConsumers` records the read position of the cursor when a new consumer registers.

If there has an in-flight reading, Dispatcher does not call `cursor.rewind` immediately but waits for the in-flight reading complete, it makes the `recentJoinedPosition` of new consumers in the wrong position.
- the last consumer is removed, mark `shouldRewindBeforeReadingOrReplaying` is true
  - the read position is `5:0`, and the mark deleted position is `3:-1`. 
- add new consumer(`C1`), skip `cursor.rewind` if `shouldRewindBeforeReadingOrReplaying` is true
- add new consumer(`C2`), put `C2` into `recentlyJoinedConsumers`, the max read position of `C2` is `5:0`
- add new consumer(`C3`), put `C3` into `recentlyJoinedConsumers`, the max read position of `C3` is `5:0`
- the in-flight reading is complete, rewind `read position` to `3:0`.
  - at this time, the `max read position` of all the consumers should be null.

You can reproduce this issue by the test [testRecentJoinCorrectAfterAllConsumerClosed](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/20407/files#diff-9b6d6cfe11dd8089b57cb69a555630ea4fd9f3d2b3f3531e3468807fcca026b4R1224)

---

# Goals
**Sub-Goal-1**: when a **Cursor Position Reset*** occurs, reject new reading, discard the in-flight reading and half in-flight reading<subp>[6]</sup>. And take care of these two things:
- Ensure that changes to `read position` and `mark deleted position` are thread-safe.
- Since more than one component uses Cursor to do **Sequential Read** or **Message Replay Read**, these components may also have their own attributes that need to be modified atomicity. We should also provide a mechanism to guarantee the atomicity modification of both attributes of Cursor and attributes of other components. 
**Sub-Goal-2**: Remove some patches(referred to as **Goal-3**):
  - Revert https://github.com/apache/pulsar/issues/6403 (it named "A compensation mechanism of **Message Replay Read**" above)
  - Remove the mechanism Rewind After In-flight Reading<sup>[5]</sup>
**Out of scope**: Prevent more than one **Cursor Position Reset** executed at the same time(Current Proposal does not consider this optimization, there will be some bug fixes after this PIP)

# High-Level Design

### New concepts
- **Cursor state is under revision**: indicate if there is a **Cursor Position Reset** running. Reject new readings and discard in-flight reading if it is `true`.
- **Cursor state revision num**: a counter to record how many times the **Cursor Position Reset** executed. If it is increased after an in-flight reading, discard this reading.
  - This attribute can help to prevent such error: a reading is started(`${Cursor state is under revision}` is `false`); a **Cursor Position Reset** is executed; the reading is completed(`${Cursor state is under revision}` is `false`).

### Guarantee safe changes
- Inside Cursor: the changes of attributes `read position`, `mark deleted position`, `cursor state revision num`, and `cursor state is under revision` use the same lock.
- Outside Cursor
  - The action **Cursor Position Reset*** update `${Cursor state is under revision}` to `true` first, which guarantees that no other **Cursor Position Reset*** events will reenter(fast fail), and new reading can be rejected (In other words, it is the same as a non-reentrant lock).
  - Each component (such as Dispatcher, Replicator...) modifies its attributes(each component to decide whether it needs to a locked).
  - End the change: change `${Cursor state is under revision}` to `false`; update `read position` and `mark deleted position`; increase **Cursor state revision num**(help to prevent such error: a reading is started(`${Cursor state revision num}` is increased); a **Cursor Position Reset** is executed; the reading is completed).
  
# Detailed Design

**CursorStateRevisionController.java**
```java
/** A counter to record how many times the **Cursor Position Reset** executed. If it is increased after an in-flight reading, discard this reading. **/
private volatile int revisionNum;
/**
 * Indicate if there is a **Cursor Position Reset** running. Inject new readings and discard in-flight reading if it is `true`.
 * 0: no task is running.
 * 1: the task is running 
 */
private volatile int isUnderRevision;

/**
* Set `isUnderRevision` to `true`.
* return `-1` if there is a Cursor State Revision in progress, else return {@link #revisionNum}.
*/
public synchronized int startRevision();

/**
 * Compare and set `isUnderRevision` to `false`; increase {@link #revisionNum}; and call `@param cursorStateEditor`(you can change `read position` and `mark deleted position` in this method).
 * return `-1` if the result of compare and set `isUnderRevision` is `false`, else return {@link #revisionNum}.
 */
public synchronized int endRevision(java.util.function.Consumer<Cursor> cursorStateEditor);

/** Return false if there is a running revisionNum increase task or revisionNum was changed. **/
public boolean isRevisionNumOutdated(int revisionNum);

public int getRevisionNum();
```

**CursorStats.java**
```java
public int revisionNum;
public int isUnderRevision;
```

A demo of `rewind` in Key_shared mode:
```java
if(cursor.revisionController.startRevision() != -1) {
  dispatcher.clearDelayedMessageTracker();
  dispatcher.clearRedeliveryMessages();
  dispatcher.clearRecentJoinedConsumers();
  cursor.revisionController.endRevision(() -> cursor.updatePosition(cursor.markDeletedPosition + 1));
} else {
  // do retry or something else.
}
```

A demo of **Sequential Read**:
```java
public synchronized void readMoreEntries() {
  ReadEntriesCallback cb = this;
  int entriesCountToRead = 10;
  int revisionNum = cursor.getEpoch();
  cursor.asyncRead(entriesCountToRead, cb, revisionNum);
}

public final synchronized void readEntriesComplete(List<Entry> entries, Object ctx) {
  int cursorRevisionNumWhenStartRead = (int) ctx;
  // Normally “readEntriesComplete” and **Cursor Position Reset** are mutually exclusive.
  if (cursor.revisionController.isRevisionNumOutdated(cursorEpochWhenStartRead)) {
    entries.forEach(Entry::release);
    return;
  }
  // send messages to clients.
}
```

### Metrics

**pulsar_cursor_epoch_increase_count**
- Description: how many times the `read position` of the cursor has been changed by the **Cursor Position Reset**
- type: Counter
- labels: `[cluster, namespace, topic, subscription]`
- unit: times

**pulsar_cursor_epoch_increase_task_state**
- Description:
    - 0: no Cursor state revision task is running.
    - 1: the Cursor state revision task is running
- type: Enumeration
- labels: `[cluster, namespace, topic, subscription]`

# Monitoring
- If the frequency of `pulsar_cursor_epoch` is high, it means that the client uses a lot of APIs to manually modify the `read position` of the Cursor; or restarts all clients frequently, resulting in frequent `rewind`.
- **Alert**: If `pulsar_cursor_epoch_increase_task_running` is not 0 for a long time, it indicates that there is a bug that will cause consumption stuck.

# Backward & Forward Compatability

Nothing should be cared for.

# Foot notes
<strong>[1]</strong>: `cursor.rewind` is an internal API. It is used in these three scenarios:
- When there have no consumers on the dispatcher of subscription, the dispatcher will give up all the states in the memory(such as messages which will be redelivery; the messages which are delay messages...) and reset the `read position` to `{mark deleted position} + 1`, just like this dispatcher is a new one. We can call this mechanism Dispatcher Reset.
- The compression task reads all the data twice, first to find the key that needs to be retained and second to dump the data to a new ledger. After the first read is complete, it resets the read point by `rewind.`
- The replication task reads messages of original cluster and sends them to the remote cluster. After the data is successfully sent, the replication task confirms these messages. If something is wrong, it relies on `rewind` to reset the read position to the `mark deleted position + 1` and restart the task.

<strong>[2]</strong>: when **Cursor Position Reset** is executed, it tends to modify these attributes of the Cursor:
- `read position`
- `mark deleted position`
- `individualDeletedMessages` and `batchDeletedIndexes`: discontinuous messages that have been acknowledged.

<strong>[3]</strong>: when **Cursor Position Reset** is executed, it tends to modify these attributes of the Dispatcher:
- `redelivery messages`: see *Message Replay Read** above
- `delayedDeliveryTracker`: delayed messages are stored here if they do not reach delivery time.
- `recently joined consumers`: the consumer recently joined will be recorded here, to support a mechanism for preventing consumption out of order for Key_Shared mode<sup>[4]</sup>.

<strong>[4]</strong>: A mechanism to prevent out-of-order consumption for for Key_Shared mode
For example:
- there have one consumer(`consumer_1`), and 100 messages( keys: `[a,b]` )
- `consumer_1` received 10 messages in the memory of the client, 5 messages with key `a`, and other messages with key `b`.
- a new consumer(`consumer_2`) registered, and Pulsar will route messages in this rule: if the key equals `a`, send to `consumer_1`, else send to `consumer_2`
- if the key of the 11th message is `b`, send it to `consumer_2`
- <strong>(Highlight)</strong> `consumer_2` handled the 11th message, but the `consumer_1` haven't handled messages yet. At the current time the messages with key `b` are consumed out of order.

Pulsar defined a mechanism to make `consumer_2` will not receive messages which are larger than `10` until all messages before `11` were acknowledged.

<strong>[5]</strong>: A new stuck caused by the mechanism Rewind After In-flight Reading
If there has an in-flight reading, Dispatcher does not call `cursor.rewind` immediately but waits for the in-flight reading complete, it makes the `recentJoinedPosition` of new consumers in the wrong position.
- the last consumer is removed, mark `shouldRewindBeforeReadingOrReplaying` is true
    - the read position is `5:0`, and the mark deleted position is `3:-1`.
- add new consumer(`C1`), skip `cursor.rewind` if `shouldRewindBeforeReadingOrReplaying` is true
    - see https://github.com/apache/pulsar/blob/master/pulsar-broker/src/main/java/org/apache/pulsar/broker/service/persistent/PersistentDispatcherMultipleConsumers.java#L163-L169
- add new consumer(`C2`), put `C2` into `recentlyJoinedConsumers`, the max read the position of `C2` is `5:0`
- add new consumer(`C3`), put `C3` into `recentlyJoinedConsumers`, the max read the position of `C3` is `5:0`
- the in-flight reading is complete, rewind `read position` to `3:0`.
    - at this time, the `max read position` of all the consumers should be null.

<strong>[6]</strong>: **Half in-flight reading**: The task **Sequential Read** contains two actions: `change read position` and `send messages to consumer`. In fact, the action `change read position` and the action `send messages to consumer` run in different threads. **Cursor Position Reset** may run after the action `change read position` and before `send messages to consumer`, and we also should discard the entries which read completely in the current round.

<strong>[7]</strong>: **Background of Geo-Replication:** The replicator works like this:  read messages from the source cluster; send messages to the target cluster; if there has something error, Replicator will rewind these messages; loop to the next reading.
