# PIP-314: Add metrics pulsar_subscription_redelivery_messages

# Background knowledge

## Delivery of messages in normal

First, the `motivation & background` of this proposal is only relevant to `Key_Shared` subscriptions.

To simplify the description of the mechanism, let's take the policy [Auto Split Hash Range](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.0.x/concepts-messaging/#auto-split-hash-range)  as an example:

| `0 ~ 16,384`      | `16,385 ~ 32,768` | `32,769 ~ 65,536`              |
|-------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------|
| ------- C1 ------ | ------- C2 ------ | ------------- C3 ------------- |

- If the entry key is between `-1(non-include) ~ 16,384(include)`, it is delivered to C1
- If the entry key is between `16,384(non-include) ~ 32,768(include)`, it is delivered to C2
- If the entry key is between `32,768(non-include) ~ 65,536(include)`, it is delivered to C3

# Motivation

For the example above, if `C1` is stuck or consumed slowly, the Broker will push the entries that should be delivered to `C1` into a memory collection `redelivery_messages` and read next entries continue, then the collection `redelivery_messages` becomes larger and larger and take up a lot of memory. When sending messages, it will also determine the key of the entries in the collection `redelivery_messages`, affecting performance.

# Goals
- Add metrics
  - Broker level:
    - Add a metric `pulsar_broker_max_subscription_redelivery_messages_total` to indicate the max one `{redelivery_messages}` of subscriptions in the broker, used by pushing an alert if it is too large. Nit: The Broker will print a log, which contains the name of the subscription(which has the maximum count of redelivery messages). This will help find the issue subscription.
    - Add a metric `pulsar_broker_memory_usage_of_redelivery_messages_bytes` to indicate the memory usage of all `redelivery_messages` in the broker. This is helpful for memory health checks.
- Improve `Topic stats`.
  - Add an attribute `redeliveryMessageCount` under `SubscriptionStats`

Differ between `redelivery_messages` and `pulsar_subscription_unacked_messages & pulsar_subscription_back_log`

- `pulsar_subscription_unacked_messages`: the messages have been delivered to the client but have not been acknowledged yet.
- `pulsar_subscription_back_log`: how many messages should be acknowledged, contains delivered messages, and the messages which should be delivered.

### Public API

<strong>SubscriptionStats.java</strong>
```java
long getRedeliveryMessageCount();
```

### Metrics

**pulsar_broker_max_subscription_redelivery_messages_total**
- Description: the max one `{redelivery_messages}` of subscriptions in the broker.
- Attributes: `[cluster]`
- Unit: `Gauge`

**pulsar_broker_memory_usage_of_redelivery_messages_bytes**
- Description: the memory usage of all `redelivery_messages` in the broker.
- Attributes: `[cluster]`
- Unit: `Gauge`


# Monitoring

- Push an alert if `pulsar_broker_max_subscription_redelivery_messages_total` is too large. This indicates that some `Key_Shared` consumers may be stuck, and it will affect the consumption speed and increase CPU usage.
- Push an alert if `pulsar_broker_memory_usage_of_redelivery_messages_bytes` is too large. This means Redelivery messages used too much memory, which may cause OOM.
