# PIP-286: Support get position based on timestamp with topic compaction

# Background knowledge

In https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/11139 we support get position based on timestamp, but it doesn't work well with topic compaction enabled because the data may have been move to the compacted ledger.

In [PIP-278](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/pull/20624) we introduced the pluggable topic compaction service to extend the compaction.

# Motivation

In order for `get-message-id` to work well with topic compaction enabled we need to find the position according to publish time from topic compaction service,
but `TopicCompactionService` missing a method that find positions according to publish time or other metadata, so we should add it.

In addition, this method can also be used to find the position/offset according to offset/timestamp in the KoP.

# Goals

# High Level Design

We need to add a method to `Topic Compaction Service` that can find the matching position and other metadata information according to publishTime/index,
since the `TopicCompactionService` interface already has `@InterfaceStability.Evolving` annotation, so that we are able to add new methods directly. 

# Detailed Design

Add `findEntryByPublishTime` in the `TopicCompactionService` API.

Add `findEntryByEntryIndex` in the `TopicCompactionService` API.

Implement them in the `PulsarTopicCompactionService` using binary search.

When get messageId by timestamp, find position from topicCompactionService if we can't find position in the manageLedger.

## Public-facing Changes

 ```java
  @InterfaceAudience.Public
  @InterfaceStability.Evolving
  public interface TopicCompactionService extends AutoCloseable { 

   /**
    * Find the first entry that greater or equal to target publishTime.
    *
    * @param publishTime  the publish time of entry.
    * @return the first entry that greater or equal to target publishTime, this entry can be null.
    */
    CompletableFuture<Entry> findEntryByPublishTime(long publishTime);
    
    /**
    * Find the first entry that greater or equal to target entryIndex.
    *
    * @param entryIndex  the index of entry.
    * @return the first entry that greater or equal to target entryIndex, this entry can be null.
    */
    CompletableFuture<Entry> findEntryByEntryIndex(long entryIndex);
  }
  ```

# Links

* Mailing List discussion thread: https://lists.apache.org/thread/85o3sx6rhohvc370j4r7yd2nb1tx736c
* Mailing List voting thread: https://lists.apache.org/thread/q27zg49mpr8otwh29s3sncdcx8ly7ws6