# PIP-356: Support Geo-Replication starts at earliest position 

# Background knowledge

Replication reads messages from the source cluster, and copies them to the remote cluster.
- Registers a cursor named `pulsar.repl.{remote-cluster}` on the source cluster. Replicator reads messages relies on this cursor.
- Registers a producer on the remote cluster. Replicator writes messages relies on this producer.

# Motivation

If you have some older messages to migrate, the steps recommended are below, which was described at [pulsar doc](https://pulsar.apache.org/docs/3.2.x/administration-geo/#migrate-data-between-clusters-using-geo-replication).
1. Create the cursor that the replicator will use manually: `pulsar-admin topics create-subscription -s pulsar.repl.{remote-cluster} -m earliest <topic>`.
2. Enable namespace-level/topic-level Geo-Replication. 

The steps recommended are difficultly to use, for example: 
- Create cursor `pulsar.repl.{remote-cluster}` manually.
- The namespace/topic was unloaded due to a re-balance.
  - The broker will remove the `pulsar.repl.{remote-cluster}` automatically because the Geo-Replication feature is disabled at this moment.
- Enable namespace-level/topic-level Geo-Replication, but the cursor that was created manually has been deleted, the broker will create a new one with latest position, which is not expected.


# Goals
Add an optional config to support Geo-Replication starts at earliest position.

### Configuration

**broker.conf**
```properties
# The position that replication task start at, it can be set to "earliest" or "latest (default)".
replicationStartAt=latest
```

**ServiceConfiguration**
```java
@FieldContext(
    category = CATEGORY_REPLICATION,
    dynamic = true,
    doc = "The position that replication task start at, it can be set to earliest or latest (default)."
)
String replicationStartAt = "latest";
```