# PIP-315: Configurable max delay limit for delayed delivery

# Background knowledge
Delayed message delivery is an important feature which allows a producer to specify that a message should be delivered/consumed at a later time. Currently the broker will save a delayed message without any check. The message's `deliverAt` time is checked when the broker dispatches messages to the Consumer. If a message has a `deliverAt` time, then it is added to the `DelayedDeliveryTracker` and will be delivered later when eligible.

Delayed message delivery is only available for persistent topics, and shared/key-shared subscription types.

# Motivation
Currently there is no max delay limit so a producer can specify any delay when publishing a message.

This poses a few challenges:
1. Producer may miscalculate/misconfigure a very large delay (ex. 1,000 day instead of 100 day delay)
2. Pulsar administrators may want to limit the max allowed delay since unacked messages (ex. messages with a large delay) will be stored forever (unless TTL is configured)
3. The configured delay may be greater than the configured TTL which means the delayed message may be deleted before the `deliverAt` time (before the Consumer can process it)

# Goals
The purpose of this PIP is to introduce an optional configuration to limit the max allowed delay for delayed delivery.

## In Scope
- Add broker configuration to limit the max allowed delay for delayed delivery
- Configurable at broker/topic/namespace-level

## Out of Scope

# High Level Design
We will add a configuration `maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds` and if configured, the broker will check incoming delayed messages to see if the message's `deliverAt` time exceeds the configured limit. If it exceeds the limit, the broker will send an error back to the Producer.

# Detailed Design

## Design & Implementation Details
A new `maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds` config will be added to the broker which is initially defaulted to 0 (disabled). The default (disabled) behavior will match the current delayed delivery behavior (no limit on delivery delay).
```
# broker.conf
delayedDeliveryMaxDeliveryDelayInSeconds=0
```

This field will also be added to the existing `DelayedDeliveryPolicies` interface to support topic & namespace-level configuration:
```java
public interface DelayedDeliveryPolicies {
    long getMaxDeliveryDelayInSeconds();
}
```

The max delivery delay check will occur in the broker's `Producer` class inside of `checkAndStartPublish` (same place as other checks such as `isEncryptionEnabled`).

We only have to perform the check if all of the following are true:
1. Sending to a persistent topic
2. Topic has `delayedDeliveryEnabled=true`
3. `MessageMetadata` `deliver_at_time` has been specified

We will return a `ServerError.NotAllowedError` error if `deliver_at_time` exceeds the max allowed delay.

```java
// In org.apache.pulsar.broker.service.Producer#checkAndStartPublish
if (topic.isPersistent()) {
    headersAndPayload.markReaderIndex();
    MessageMetadata msgMetadata = Commands.parseMessageMetadata(headersAndPayload);
    headersAndPayload.resetReaderIndex();
    if (msgMetadata.hasDeliverAtTime()) {
        long deliverAtTime = msgMetadata.getDeliverAtTime();
        long maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds = ((PersistentTopic) topic).getMaxDeliveryDelayInSeconds();
        if (deliverAtTime > System.currentTimeMillis() + maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds * 1000) {
            cnx.execute(() -> {
                cnx.getCommandSender().sendSendError(producerId, sequenceId, ServerError.NotAllowedError,
                        "Exceeds max allowed delivery delay");
                cnx.completedSendOperation(false, headersAndPayload.readableBytes());
            });
            return false;
        }
    }
}
```

## Public-facing Changes

### Public API
The optional `maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds` field will be added to the admin REST APIs for configuring topic/namespace policies:
- `POST /admin/v2/namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/delayedDelivery`
- `POST /admin/v2/persistent/{tenant}/{namespace}/{topic}/delayedDelivery`

And the corresponding `GET` APIs will show `maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds` in the response:
- `GET /admin/v2/namespaces/{tenant}/{namespace}/delayedDelivery`
- `GET /admin/v2/persistent/{tenant}/{namespace}/{topic}/delayedDelivery`

### Configuration
Broker will have a new config in `broker.conf`:
```
# The max allowed delay for delayed delivery (in seconds). If the broker receives a message which exceeds this max delay, then
# it will return an error to the producer.
# The default value is 0 which means there is no limit on the max delivery delay.
delayedDeliveryMaxDeliveryDelayInSeconds=0
```

### CLI
Both `CmdTopics` and `CmdNamespaces` will be updated to include this additional optional configuration.

# Backward & Forward Compatibility

## Revert
Reverting to a previous version will simply get rid of this config/limitation which is the previous behavior.

## Upgrade
We will default the value to 0/disabled (no limitation), so this is a backwards compatible change and will not cause any functional change when upgrading to this feature/version. This feature will only be applied once the config is changed.

If configured, the `maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds` limitation will affect:
1. Producers who configure a longer max delivery delay (PIP-26: 2.4.0+)
2. Consumers who configure a longer retry delay  when using retry topic (PIP-58: 2.6.0+) 

# Alternatives

# General Notes
- It is important to note that setting a max delivery delay may impact the Consumer since the Consumer uses delayed delivery for retry/dlq topic (ex. `reconsumeLater` API). So the max Consumer retry delay will be the same as the configured `maxDeliveryDelayInSeconds` (if enabled).
    - A problem will occur if max delivery delay is configured, but a Consumer requires a larger custom retry delay. In this case, a larger retry delay should be configured specifically for the Consumer's retry topic.

# Links

<!--
Updated afterwards
-->
* Mailing List discussion thread: https://lists.apache.org/thread/285nm08842or324rxc2zy83wxgqxtcjp
* Mailing List voting thread: